
# ***CompilersProj2 - Parser***
2/25/2026

### Group Members

- Aedan DeFrates
- Alex Hawk
- Lorenzo Jackson
- Joshua Walther

## Parser Theory  and ANTLR
### What is a Parser?
The Parser is the second step of a compiler frontend. It takes in a series of tokens from the lexer, and converts the tokens into a parse tree, which is then used to construct an abstract syntax tree(AST) that represents the structure of a program. The nodes of an AST represent different constructs in our programming language like If statements and function declarations. The AST nodes are defined using grammars, which are made up of Terminal symbols(Tokens), Non Terminal symbols, Productions(statements), and a Start symbol(Program). This AST can then be used to validate the programs semantics through semantic analysis.

### What is ANTLR?
ANTLR is a lexer and parser generator that simplifies the process of writing a lexer and parser. In the ANTLR file `gParser.g4`, there are parser rules that define our languages grammar using tokens and other terminals. Then, ANTLR will generate the respective Java code and classes. In these files ANTLR generates classes called Contexts to define nodes of our parse tree, and generates a Visitor interface defining methods we can use to create our AST nodes from each corresponding Context class. We will discuss these later in the Code Implementation section .

## How to run our project
To run our lexer, use the provided shell scripts and test files.  
`./run.sh <test_file>`  
`./test.sh`  
or  
`./run_solution.sh <test_file>`  
to run the solution.
## Code Implementation
Our task for this project was to implement the `ASTBuilder` class, which requires us to write visit methods for every Context class  generated from our parser rules. These methods when called will create the nodes used to build are AST. To implement these methods we first need to understand ANTLR's Context and Visitor features.

### ANTLR Features

#### Contexts Classes
From our parser file ANTLR generates a `gParse.java` file that defines classes for each grammar production rule called Contexts. These Contexts are defined recursively with child Context classes. Each generated Context class has corresponding methods that return the Contexts for each of the terminals and nonterminals that make up its production rule. This creates a tree like structure of contexts with child as other contexts and tokens; this is the parse tree for our program which we can then create our AST from.

For example a rule `IF LPAREN expr RPAREN statement #IfStmt` in our `gParser.g4` file creates a new class in the generated java parser file called `IfStmtContext`. This class has methods for `expr()` and `statement()` that return an `ExprContext` and `StatementContext` object respectively.



#### Visitor Methods
To create our AST from the Context parse tree, we utilize the Vistors feature of ANTLR. The visitor pattern is a design pattern that dispatches to the correct version of a function based on which subclass is passed as an argument. A Vistor interface is generated by ANTLR based on our parser file that defines visit methods for each of our Contexts, which are all child classes of the parent `ParserRuleContext` class. We can then use a custom class called ASTBuilder to implement this interface and all of the visitor methods.  There are also ABSyn node classes prewritten for us for each grammar rule that have methods that contain the respective data from the contexts. Our visit methods will return the corresponding ABSyn classes for each of our contexts allowing us to create our AST.   The dispatch method `visit(Context)` created by ANTLR then calls the correct visit method for use based on the type of the  input passes.

### Creating a Visit Method
Here is the format for a basic visit method:
```
@Override   //Visit Method for ProductionName
public Absyn visitProductionName(gParser.ProductionNameContext ctx) {  
   return new ABSynProdClassName(  
           position,  
           visit(ctx.terminalName1()),  
           visit(ctx.terminalName2()),   
   );  
}
```
The method overrides an existing method in our visitor interface, named visit with the production rules name, and as a parameter takes in the corresponding production rule Context. The method then returns the corresponding ABSyn class by creating a new object of that class using the data stored within the context. The parameters of the ABSyn node constructor include other types of ABSyn node classes that can be retrieved themselves through using the visit method.


Here is an example of an actual visit method for an If statement:
```
@Override   //If Statement  
public Absyn visitIfStmt(gParser.IfStmtContext ctx) {  
   return new IfStmt(  
           0,  
           (Exp)visit(ctx.expr()),  
           (Stmt)visit(ctx.statement()),  
           new EmptyStmt(0)  
   );  
}
```
Here the method is overriding the `visitIfStmt()` method in the visitor interface that corresponds to a production rule in our parser file called `#IfStmt`. This method then returns a new object of our custom `IfStmt` class which has fields for both the condition expression and resulting code statement to be executed. To get these we call the visit method on the expression and statement Contexts defined in our `IfStmtContext`.

The rest of our visit methods follows this basic format, although many of them require more complex logic in order to extract the correct data from the Context object for the ABSyn constructor, like getting values of tokens, or working with multiple context values of the same type.


## Group Strategy and Issues Encountered

### Group Strategy
We divided parser work by the nonterminals and their respective visitor methods. Each member picked tasks from the GitHub issues list.

### Issues Encountered  
The hardest part of this assignment was getting started. The visit methods that need to be implemented and the context classes are hidden behind long generated java classes, so it was tedious to document every method that needed to be implemented. Also the fact that we are working with grammar rules, context, visit methods, ABSyn classes all at the same time spread across multiple files, all related but different from each other made it difficult to understand what we needed to do at first. Once we were able to implement the first visitor, the rest were pretty easy for the most part, with some more complex methods requiring checking for different conditions or using for loops for lists of the same contexts.